ADR-DSP-0001 for DSP upgrade testing (#14)
opendatahub-io/architecture-decision-records: ODH-ADR-0007-data-science-pipelines-upgrade-testing-strategy.md

## Goals

* Automate the upgrade testing process using GitHub Actions.
* Regularly test the success of DSP version upgrades using the most recent commit or tag.
* Detect issues early and provide continuous feedback on the stability and functionality of the upgraded DSP versions.
* Incorporate upgrade testing into the regular release strategy to ensure smooth transitions between released and unreleased DSP versions.

## Non-Goals

* This ADR does not cover the detailed implementation of GitHub Actions or the specific customization of upgrade tests for different use cases. Those aspects can be tailored according to specific requirements.

## How

To perform the upgrade testing process for DSP, follow the steps below:

1. Set up a Test Environment:
   - Provision a test Kubernetes cluster or an OpenShift cluster.
   - Ensure cluster admin privileges are available to perform the following steps.

> 2. Install Open Data Hub (ODH) Operator.

Reviewer: Has there been any consideration for testing prior to attempting to deploy with ODH?

I would expect there are some unit tests already for the operator already.  Do those need to be executed prior to attempting to deploy with ODH?  Are they already expected to be executed on every PR prior to merging?  If so, does a passing state need to be validated before attempting to deploy with ODH?

Prior to testing with ODH, has the manifest been validated without ODH/KFDef (e.g. `oc apply -k`) to validate that the desired manifests are functional?

Author: > I would expect there are some unit tests already for the operator already. Do those need to be executed prior to attempting to deploy with ODH?

Yes, the operator already has unit tests in place. 

> Prior to testing with ODH, has the manifest been validated without ODH/KFDef (e.g. oc apply -k) to validate that the desired manifests are functional?

Integration tests are also conducted to validate the compatibility and interaction of the DSP components with ODH. Integration tests cover the validation of manifests.

> Are they already expected to be executed on every PR prior to merging? 

Yes, both the unit and integration tests are executed on every PR before merging.

> 3. Deploy KfDef Core for the First DSPO Version (e.g., v1.7):

Reviewer: The terms `first version`, `second version`, and `target version` are all used throughout the document.  `First` and `second` don't make much sense to me and I would recommend updating these to be something a little more descriptive.

Would `released  version` instead of `first version` and `candidate version` instead of `second`/`target` be more descriptive for what you are trying to say?

Author: Makes sense. Updated the document to mention `released` version instead of `first` version and `candidate` version instead of `second/target`

>    - Use the KfDef manifest to deploy the core components of the first DSP version (e.g., v1.7).

Reviewer: Has there been any consideration for how this process will change with the ODH Operator redesign?  The KfDef manifest will not longer be utilized so it may be worth talking to the operator team to see how they expect this process to work from their end.  I'm not sure if they are at a phase yet where they know, but this will be something they need to figure out for all components.

Author: Checked with the operator team on this - Updating manifests will not be supported officially in the operator, but in dev mode, users can update manifest uri, which will allow you to test upgrades. Cc: @VaishnaviHire 

I'll still list out ODH Operator redesign as a risk to the upgrade testing process.

>    - Follow the deployment instructions provided by the ODH and DSP documentation for the specified version.

Reviewer: This statement is vague and it is unclear what the goal of this step is.  I don't expect that "follow instructions in documentation" are something that can be codified in a pipeline.  

At this stage I would expect that ODH is already deployed, and an instance of DSPO has already been created.  Is this step then to deploy a Data Science Project and a DSP Application instance?

Author: > This statement is vague and it is unclear what the goal of this step is. I don't expect that "follow instructions in documentation" are something that can be codified in a pipeline.

The intent of this document is to define a manual upgrade testing process, and mention an approach to automate it. Please refer to the `Non Goals` section.

> At this stage I would expect that ODH is already deployed, and an instance of DSPO has already been created. Is this step then to deploy a Data Science Project and a DSP Application instance?

ODH is deployed at this stage but an instance of DSPO isn't created. We need to deploy a DSPO instance, as listed in  steps #3 to #5.

Reviewer 2: I think we can just say "Deploy a DSPA instance", we don't need to say any more here about documentation, or how to do it. Same for step 5.

Author: Updated as suggested.

   - Verify the successful deployment of the first DSPO version and ensure that all necessary components, such as DSP Operator (DSPO) and DSP Application (DSPA), are running.

4. Prepare for Upgrade Testing:
   - Determine the target version for the DSP upgrade (e.g., v1.17).
   - Update the KfDef manifest for the second DSP version (e.g., v1.17) by configuring DSPO to point to the latest commit or a tag for that version.

5. Deploy KfDef Core for the Second DSP Version:
   - Use the updated KfDef manifest to deploy the core components for the second DSPO version.
   - Follow the deployment instructions provided by the ODH and DSP documentation for the target version.
   - Verify the successful deployment of the second DSP version and ensure that all necessary components, including the upgraded DSP Operator, are running.

6. Run Upgrade Tests:
   - Execute tests specific to testing the success of the DSP version upgrade. Examples of test cases could include checking if resources such as DSPO and DSPA deployments, ServiceMonitors, etc., come up correctly.
   - Customize the tests according to specific requirements and use cases.

> 7. Automating the Upgrade Testing Process:

Reviewer: The rest of the list reads to me as "these are the steps that should be automated" and this one seems very out of place.  Should this list be part of the number list above, or a separate list outside of the list of steps to be automated?

Author: Same as mentioned in the comment earlier, the intent of this document is to specify a manual upgrade testing process, and mention an approach to automate it.

Reviewer 3: I think what @strangiato is mentioning is that the steps 1-6 are defined and explict actionionable procedure, but item 7 is a suggestion for future work.  Could we make this a subheading instead (like `## Automation Considerations`)?

Author: Done, created a separate subheading for Automation Considerations.

   - Set up a GitHub Action workflow to automate the upgrade testing process.
   - Configure the workflow to trigger every night asynchronously using the most recent commit of the DSP upgrade branch.
   - Within the GitHub Action workflow, deploy the updated KfDef Core for the second DSP version and run the upgrade tests.
   - Collect the test results, including logs, error messages, and any

## Security and Privacy Considerations

No security and privacy considerations identified for the upgrade testing process.

> ## Risks

Reviewer: I would consider the ODH Operator Redesign a risk to this process as I would expect it will change significantly once the redesign is complete.

* Detect issues early and provide continuous feedback on the stability and functionality of the upgraded DSP versions.
* Incorporate upgrade testing into the regular release strategy to ensure smooth transitions between released and unreleased DSP versions.

## Non-Goals

* This ADR does not cover the implementation details such as tooling that ought to be used. Those aspects can be tailored according to specific requirements.

## How

The update testing strategy should account for all pre-requisites for deploying DSP, then perform an upgrade, and any follow up tests to confirm the upgrade was successful. The following outlines the design for such a process: 

1. Set up a Test Environment:
   - Provision a test Kubernetes cluster or an OpenShift cluster.
   - Ensure cluster admin privileges are available to perform the following steps.

2. Install Open Data Hub (ODH) Operator.

3. Deploy KfDef Core for the most recently released DSPO Version:
   - Use the KfDef manifest to deploy the core components of the most recently released DSP version.
   - Deploy a DSPA instance
   
4. Prepare for Upgrade Testing:

>    - Determine the candidate version for the DSP upgrade.

Reviewer 2: let's say candidate version/tag/branch/commit, we want flexibility to use this testing framework on all of these upon request/input/trigger/etc.

Author: Done, upgraded to mention that the candidate version could be a tag, branch or a commit.

   - Within the workflow, deploy the updated KfDef Core for the candidate DSP version and run the upgrade tests.
   - Collect the test results, including logs, error messages, and any relevant information.

## Security and Privacy Considerations

No security and privacy considerations identified for the upgrade testing process.

## Risks

1. ODH Operator Redesign:
   - As per the input from the operator team, updating manifests will not be officially supported in the ODH Operator.
   - In development mode, users may have the option to update the manifest URI, which can enable testing of upgrades. However, this approach may not be officially supported and could introduce potential inconsistencies or issues.
   - There is a risk that relying on the manifest update capability in development mode may not align with the desired upgrade testing process or may not be reliable in a production environment.
   
2. The implementing team may face challenges in building and maintaining the automated upgrade testing process.

## Reviews

| Reviewed by    | Date            | Notes |
| -------------- | --------------- | ----- |

> | Humair K.      | July 18th, 2023 | --    |

Reviewer 4: I don't know if its required but 
Achyut M. | July 19th 2023

> |                               |            |       |

Reviewer 2: Humair K.  | July 18th, 2023 | --

Author: Done. Thank you!

# Upgrade Testing Process for Data Science Pipelines (DSP)

> |                |            |

Reviewer 3: maybe not.  ignore

| -------------- | -------------------------- |
| Date           | 2023-07-05                 |
| Scope          |                            |
| Status         | Draft                      |
| Authors        | [Dharmit Dalvi](@DharmitD) |
| Supersedes     | N/A                        |
| Superseded by: | N/A                        |
| Tickets        |                            |
| Other docs:    | none                       |

## What

This document outlines the upgrade testing process for Data Science Pipelines (DSP). The process involves upgrading DSP from a latest released version to a version with the newest commit in main (or a tag version).

## Why

The upgrade testing process is crucial to ensure the successful upgrade of DSP versions and to identify any issues early on. By following a standardized testing approach, we can automate the process and provide continuous feedback on the stability and functionality of the upgraded DSP versions.

## Goals

> * Automate the upgrade testing process using GitHub Actions.

Author: Updated as suggested.

* Regularly test the success of DSP version upgrades using the most recent commit or tag.
* Detect issues early and provide continuous feedback on the stability and functionality of the upgraded DSP versions.
* Incorporate upgrade testing into the regular release strategy to ensure smooth transitions between released and unreleased DSP versions.

## Non-Goals

* This ADR does not cover the detailed implementation of GitHub Actions or the specific customization of upgrade tests for different use cases. Those aspects can be tailored according to specific requirements.

## How

> To perform the upgrade testing process for DSP, follow the steps below:

Reviewer 2: The wording here is very much sounding like a "how to", I think want to word things in a way that detail our design decisions/intent, for instance: 

```suggestion
The update testing strategy should account for all pre-requisites for deploying DSP, then perform an upgrade, and any follow up tests to confirm the upgrade was successful. The following outlines the design for such a process: 
```

Author: Updated as suggested.

1. Set up a Test Environment:
   - Provision a test Kubernetes cluster or an OpenShift cluster.
   - Ensure cluster admin privileges are available to perform the following steps.

2. Install Open Data Hub (ODH) Operator.

> 3. Deploy KfDef Core for the released DSPO Version (e.g., v1.7):

Author: Updated as suggested.

   - Use the KfDef manifest to deploy the core components of the released DSP version (e.g., v1.7).
   - Follow the deployment instructions provided by the ODH and DSP documentation for the specified version.
   - Verify the successful deployment of the released DSPO version and ensure that all necessary components, such as DSP Operator (DSPO) and DSP Application (DSPA), are running.

4. Prepare for Upgrade Testing:

>    - Determine the candidate version for the DSP upgrade (e.g., v1.17).

Reviewer 2: The candidate need not be a version, we want to test upgrade upon a commit essentially, this can be `main` even, or some commit in history, or a tag, latest in branch, etc.

5. Deploy KfDef Core for the candidate DSP Version:
   - Use the updated KfDef manifest to deploy the core components for the candidate DSPO version.
   - Deploy a DSPA instance
   
6. Run Upgrade Tests:

>    - Execute tests specific to testing the success of the DSP version upgrade. Examples of test cases could include checking if resources such as DSPO and DSPA deployments, ServiceMonitors, etc., come up correctly.

Reviewer 5: What about already running pipelines?

Author: Added this query to the Open Questions section.

6. Run Upgrade Tests:
   - Execute tests specific to testing the success of the DSP version upgrade. Examples of test cases could include checking if resources such as DSPO and DSPA deployments, ServiceMonitors, etc., come up correctly.
   - Customize the tests according to specific requirements and use cases.

7. Automating the Upgrade Testing Process:

>    - Set up a GitHub Action workflow to automate the upgrade testing process.

Reviewer 2: remove mentions of github actions, we want to stay clear of implementation specifics

   - Configure the workflow to trigger every night asynchronously using the most recent commit of the DSP upgrade branch.
   - Within the GitHub Action workflow, deploy the updated KfDef Core for the candidate DSP version and run the upgrade tests.

>    - Collect the test results, including logs, error messages, and any

Reviewer 2: > error messages, and any 

and any...???

Author: Oops, not sure how that got deleted. Updated to complete the sentence now.

No security and privacy considerations identified for the upgrade testing process.

## Risks

1. ODH Operator Redesign:
   - As per the input from the operator team, updating manifests will not be officially supported in the ODH Operator.
   - In development mode, users may have the option to update the manifest URI, which can enable testing of upgrades. However, this approach may not be officially supported and could introduce potential inconsistencies or issues.
   - There is a risk that relying on the manifest update capability in development mode may not align with the desired upgrade testing process or may not be reliable in a production environment.
   
2. The implementing team may face challenges in building and maintaining the automated upgrade testing process.

## Reviews

| Reviewed by    | Date            | Notes |
| -------------- | --------------- | ----- |
| Humair K.      | July 18th, 2023 | --    |
| Achyut M.      | July 19th, 2023 | --    |

> | Greg S.        | July 20th, 2023 | --    |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| Greg S.        | July 20th, 2023 | --    |
| Giulio F.      | July 21st, 2023 | --    |
```

   - Determine the candidate version for the DSP upgrade. It could be a tag, branch or a commit.
   - Update the KfDef manifest for the candidate DSP version by configuring DSPO to point to the latest commit or a tag for that version.

5. Deploy KfDef Core for the candidate DSP Version:
   - Use the updated KfDef manifest to deploy the core components for the candidate DSPO version.
   - Deploy a DSPA instance
   
6. Run Upgrade Tests:
   - Execute tests specific to testing the success of the DSP version upgrade. Examples of test cases could include checking if resources such as DSPO and DSPA deployments, ServiceMonitors, etc., come up correctly.
   - Customize the tests according to specific requirements and use cases.

## Automation Considerations

   - Set up a workflow to automate the upgrade testing process.
   - Configure the workflow to trigger every night asynchronously using the most recent commit of the DSP upgrade branch.
   - Within the workflow, deploy the updated KfDef Core for the candidate DSP version and run the upgrade tests.
   - Collect the test results, including logs, error messages, and any relevant information.

## Open Questions

> 1. Impact on Running Pipelines:

Reviewer 5: @DharmitD Can you create a follow-on issue for this to make sure we don't lose track? And link to that from this README

Author: @anishasthana Done, created a follow-on issue here: https://github.com/opendatahub-io/data-science-pipelines-operator/issues/217
